drivers: nrf71_sr_coex: add nRF71 Wi-Fi/Short-Range coexistence driver (#30293)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/drivers/nrf71_sr_coex.rst

.. _nrf71_sr_coex:

nRF71 Short-Range coexistence driver
####################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The nRF71 Short-Range (SR) coexistence driver coordinates concurrent operation of the Wi-Fi® and Short-Range (Bluetooth® LE) radios on the nRF71 combo SoC, which integrates both radios on a single die.

Reviewer: nRF71 combo SoC? What's the official product name, according to PMT? Let's use the official product name here

Author: Good point. Changed "nRF71 combo SoC" to "nRF71 Series device", matching the family naming used elsewhere in the docs (and "nRF70 Series" further down).

Coexistence is arbitrated on-chip by the Coexistence Controller (COEXC) hardware together with a Coexistence Manager (CM) that runs in the Wi-Fi processor firmware.
The Coexistence Driver (CD) is the host-side coordination layer between the Wi-Fi driver, the Short-Range driver, and the Coexistence Manager.
This differs from the nRF70 Series, where a separate Wi-Fi companion arbitrates with an external Short-Range SoC over a wired Packet Traffic Arbitration (PTA) interface.

Overview
********

The coexistence driver does the following:

* Exposes APIs (``coex_cd_*``) that the Short-Range and Wi-Fi drivers call to request Short-Range priority windows, report Short-Range activity, and notify radio power-state changes.
* Invokes APIs (``coex_sr_*``) on the Short-Range driver to enable coexistence and to configure the Short-Range priorities.
* Forwards coexistence commands to, and processes events from, the Coexistence Manager over the Wi-Fi host-to-firmware control path.

> The users of the driver are the nRF71 **Wi-Fi driver** and the **Short-Range (Bluetooth LE) driver**; applications do not call it directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The users of the driver are the nRF71 *Wi-Fi driver* and the *Short-Range (Bluetooth LE) driver*.
Applications do not call it directly.
```

Author: Applied.

   }

   package "Wi-Fi core (RPU)" {
     [Wi-Fi MAC\nHW clients 0-3] as MAC
     [Coexistence Manager\n(CM)] as CM
   }

   [Short-Range radio\nHW clients 4-5] as SRR
   [Coexistence Controller (COEXC)] as COEXC

   WIFID --> CD : power notify\n(coex_cd_wifi_power_notify)
   SRD --> CD : coex_cd_*\n(SR request / activity / power)
   CD --> SRD : coex_sr_*\n(enable / set priority)
   CD --> WIFID : send CD2CM\n(nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send)
   WIFID --> CD : deliver CM2CD\n(nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event)
   WIFID <--> MAC : FMAC / IPC\n(host <-> RPU)
   CD ..> CM : CD2CM commands /\nCM2CD events (via FMAC)
   CM --> COEXC : configure / CCCONF
   MAC --> COEXC : HW requests (0-3)
   SRR --> COEXC : HW requests (4-5)
   @enduml

The main interfaces are:

* **Wi-Fi driver ↔ CD** - Radio power-state notifications (``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()``), and the transport the CD uses to reach the Coexistence Manager (``nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send()`` / ``nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event()``).
* **Short-Range driver ↔ CD** - The Short-Range driver requests priority windows, reports activity, and notifies power-state changes through ``coex_cd_*``; the CD configures the Short-Range driver through ``coex_sr_*``.

> * **CD ↔ Coexistence Manager** - ``CD2CM`` commands and ``CM2CD`` events, carried over the Wi-Fi control path. The Coexistence Manager programs the COEXC hardware and the radios post their hardware requests to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Wi-Fi driver ↔ CD* - Radio power-state notifications (``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()``), and the transport the CD uses to reach the Coexistence Manager (``nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send()`` / ``nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event()``).
* *Short-Range driver ↔ CD* - The Short-Range driver requests priority windows, reports activity, and notifies power-state changes through ``coex_cd_*``.
  The CD configures the Short-Range driver through ``coex_sr_*``.
* *CD ↔ Coexistence Manager* - ``CD2CM`` commands and ``CM2CD`` events, carried over the Wi-Fi control path.
  The Coexistence Manager programs the COEXC hardware and the radios post their hardware requests to it.
```

Author: Applied.

As coexistence involves both radios, the driver depends on the nRF71 Wi-Fi driver (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NRF71`) and Bluetooth (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT`).

The following Kconfig options configure the driver:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER_INIT_PRIORITY` - Sets the initialization priority within the ``APPLICATION`` initialization level, kept after the Wi-Fi driver.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER_LOG_LEVEL` - Sets the log level for the driver.

API documentation
*****************

The coexistence API contract (the ``coex_cd_*`` and ``coex_sr_*`` functions and the ``CD2CM``/``CM2CD`` message types) is defined by the coexistence firmware interface headers, which match the interface of the ROMed nRF71 firmware.

| CD-to-CM interface header: :file:`drivers/wifi/nrf71/fw_if/nrf71_coex_if.h`
| CD-to-short-range interface header: :file:`drivers/wifi/nrf71/fw_if/nrf71_cd_sr_if.h`
| Wi-Fi transport header: :file:`include/drivers/wifi/nrf71/nrf71_wifi_coex.h`
| Source files: :file:`drivers/nrf71_sr_coex/src/`

The following APIs are exposed by the coexistence driver to the short-range and Wi-Fi drivers:

> * ``coex_cd_sr_software_client_request()`` - Requests or releases a short-range Single Priority Window (Phase 2; currently returns ``-ENOTSUP``).

Reviewer 2: there is a way to link to function documentation with a doxygen/sphinx tag

Author: Done. Put the coex interface headers in the rendered `nrf71_wifi_fw_if` doxygen group and switched the API list to `:c:func:` links. Verified with a local nrf docbuild: the links resolve to the function documentation (rendered as links, no target-not-found warnings).

.. _nrf71_sr_coex:

> nRF71 Short-Range coexistence driver

Reviewer 3: The capitalized S and R can be dropped throughout the documentation wherever short-range is used generically.
```suggestion
nRF71 short-range coexistence driver
```

Author: Done. Lowercased "short-range" throughout the page (title, intro, overview, diagram labels, and API sections).

####################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The nRF71 Short-Range (SR) coexistence driver coordinates concurrent operation of the Wi-Fi® and Short-Range (Bluetooth® LE) radios on an nRF71 Series device, which integrates both radios on a single die.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The nRF71 Short-Range (SR) coexistence driver coordinates concurrent operation of the Wi-Fi® and short-range (Bluetooth® LE) radios on an nRF71 Series device, which integrates both radios on a single die.
```

Author: Superseded by your refined suggestion below; applied that version.

> The nRF71 Short-Range (SR) coexistence driver coordinates concurrent operation of the Wi-Fi® and Short-Range (Bluetooth® LE) radios on an nRF71 Series device, which integrates both radios on a single die.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The nRF71 short-range (SR) coexistence driver coordinates the concurrent operation of the Wi-Fi® and short-range (Bluetooth® LE) radios on an nRF71 Series device, which integrates both radios on a single die.
```

Author: Applied.

Coexistence is arbitrated on-chip by the Coexistence Controller (COEXC) hardware together with a Coexistence Manager (CM) that runs in the Wi-Fi processor firmware.

> The Coexistence Driver (CD) is the host-side coordination layer between the Wi-Fi driver, the Short-Range driver, and the Coexistence Manager.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Coexistence Driver (CD) is the host-side coordination layer between the Wi-Fi driver, the short-range driver, and the Coexistence Manager.
```

Author: Applied.

> This differs from the nRF70 Series, where a separate Wi-Fi companion arbitrates with an external Short-Range SoC over a wired Packet Traffic Arbitration (PTA) interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This differs from the nRF70 Series, where a separate Wi-Fi companion arbitrates with an external short-range SoC over a wired Packet Traffic Arbitration (PTA) interface.
```

Author: Applied.

Overview
********

> The coexistence driver does the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The coexistence driver performs the following functions:
```

Author: Applied.

Architecture
============

The following diagram shows the components and the interfaces between them:

.. uml::

   @startuml
   skinparam componentStyle rectangle
   skinparam shadowing false
   skinparam defaultTextAlignment center

   package "Host (Cortex-M33)" {
     [Wi-Fi driver] as WIFID
     [Coexistence Driver\n(CD)] as CD
     [short-range (BLE) driver] as SRD
   }

   package "Wi-Fi core (RPU)" {
     [Wi-Fi MAC\nHW clients 0-3] as MAC
     [Coexistence Manager\n(CM)] as CM
   }

   [short-range radio\nHW clients 4-5] as SRR
   [Coexistence Controller (COEXC)] as COEXC

   WIFID --> CD : power notify\n(coex_cd_wifi_power_notify)
   SRD --> CD : coex_cd_*\n(SR request / activity / power)
   CD --> SRD : coex_sr_*\n(enable / set priority)
   CD --> WIFID : send CD2CM\n(nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send)
   WIFID --> CD : deliver CM2CD\n(nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event)
   WIFID <--> MAC : FMAC / IPC\n(host <-> RPU)
   CD ..> CM : CD2CM commands /\nCM2CD events (via FMAC)
   CM --> COEXC : configure / CCCONF
   MAC --> COEXC : HW requests (0-3)
   SRR --> COEXC : HW requests (4-5)
   @enduml

The main interfaces are:

> * *Wi-Fi driver ↔ CD* - Radio power-state notifications (``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()``), and the transport the CD uses to reach the Coexistence Manager (``nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send()`` / ``nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event()``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *Wi-Fi driver ↔ CD* - Radio power state notifications (``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()``), and the transport the CD uses to reach the Coexistence Manager (``nrf71_wifi_coex_cmd_send()``  and ``nrf71_wifi_coex_on_event()``).
```

Author: Applied.

> * *short-range driver ↔ CD* - The short-range driver requests priority windows, reports activity, and notifies power-state changes through ``coex_cd_*``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* *short-range driver ↔ CD* - The short-range driver requests priority windows, reports activity, and notifies power state changes through ``coex_cd_*``.
```

Author: Applied.

  The CD configures the short-range driver through ``coex_sr_*``.
* *CD ↔ Coexistence Manager* - ``CD2CM`` commands and ``CM2CD`` events, carried over the Wi-Fi control path.

>   The Coexistence Manager programs the COEXC hardware and the radios post their hardware requests to it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The Coexistence Manager programs the COEXC hardware and handles hardware requests from the radios.
```

Author: Applied.

Relationship to MPSL coexistence
--------------------------------

The Multiprotocol Service Layer (MPSL) coexistence feature (``mpsl_cx``) implements a wired-PTA request/grant interface for arbitrating a Nordic short-range radio against an *external* Wi-Fi companion.

> The nRF71 coexistence driver addresses a different topology, that is, on-die arbitration between co-located radios through the COEXC hardware and the firmware Coexistence Manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nRF71 coexistence driver targets a different topology, supporting on-die arbitration between co-located radios through the COEXC hardware and the firmware Coexistence Manager.
```

Author: Applied.

> The nRF71 coexistence driver addresses a different topology, that is on-die arbitration between co-located radios through the COEXC hardware and the firmware Coexistence Manager.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The nRF71 coexistence driver addresses a different topology, that is, on-die arbitration between co-located radios through the COEXC hardware and the firmware Coexistence Manager.
```

Author: Applied.

The two mechanisms are therefore independent, and the coexistence driver is a standalone driver rather than an MPSL coexistence backend.

Feature support
***************

The following coexistence features are implemented in the current release:

* Startup coexistence configuration (Wi-Fi and short-range priority ranges and user parameters).
* Runtime Wi-Fi coexistence enable and disable.

> * short-range Single Priority Window requests, to protect one-off short-range activity such as connection establishment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Short-range Single Priority Window requests, to protect one-off short-range activity, such as connection establishment.
```

Author: Applied.

> * Periodic Priority Window (without alignment) for high-duty-cycle activity such as Bluetooth LE fast scan.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Periodic Priority Window (without alignment) for high-duty-cycle activity, such as Bluetooth LE fast scan.
```

Author: Applied.

> * Periodic Priority Window (without alignment) for high-duty-cycle activity, such as Bluetooth LE fast scan.

Reviewer 4: PPW is not supported in Phase-1.

Author: Correct. Aligned to the ROMed firmware interface: PPW (and SPW) are Phase 2 and now return -ENOTSUP, and the driver no longer issues CD2CM_ALLOCATE_PPW. Removed from the implemented-features list.

> * Coexistence statistics retrieval.

Reviewer 4: Are you referring to stats from CM? If yes, then let us remove this line.

Author: Yes, CM statistics. Removed the line from the implemented-features list. The CD2CM_GET_STATS plumbing is kept in the code but no longer advertised as a Phase 1 feature.

* Radio power-down and power-up handling for the Wi-Fi and short-range drivers.

> The following features are planned for a later phase and are not available in the current release:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following features are planned for a later phase, and are not available in the current release:
```

Author: Applied.

* Aligned Periodic Priority Windows, synchronized to periodic short-range activity (a request for one returns ``-ENOTSUP``).
* Thread activity Periodic Priority Windows (a request returns ``-ENOTSUP``).
* Scheduling service and runtime adaptive priority optimization.
* Wi-Fi channel or band change handling and the associated Bluetooth LE bad-channel mapping.

Configuration
*************

To enable the driver, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER` Kconfig option.

> Because coexistence involves both radios, the driver depends on the nRF71 Wi-Fi driver (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NRF71`) and on Bluetooth (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As coexistence involves both radios, the driver depends on the nRF71 Wi-Fi driver (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WIFI_NRF71`) and Bluetooth (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT`).
```

Author: Applied.

The following Kconfig options configure the driver:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER_INIT_PRIORITY` - Sets the initialization priority within the ``APPLICATION`` initialization level, kept after the Wi-Fi driver.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER_CM_RESP_TIMEOUT_MS` - Sets the Coexistence Manager response timeout for synchronous commands.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF71_SR_COEX_DRIVER_LOG_LEVEL` - Sets the log level for the driver.

API documentation
*****************

The coexistence API contract (the ``coex_cd_*`` and ``coex_sr_*`` functions and the ``CD2CM``/``CM2CD`` message types) is defined in the Wi-Fi firmware interface header and documented on the :ref:`nRF71 Series Wi-Fi driver <nrf71_wifi_fw_if>` page.

| API header: :file:`drivers/wifi/nrf71/fw_if/nrf71_wifi_common.h`
| Wi-Fi transport header: :file:`include/drivers/wifi/nrf71/nrf71_wifi_coex.h`
| Source files: :file:`drivers/nrf71_sr_coex/src/`

> APIs exposed by the coexistence driver to the short-range and Wi-Fi drivers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following APIs are exposed by the coexistence driver to the short-range and Wi-Fi drivers:
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_cd_sr_software_client_request()`` - Request or release a short-range Single Priority Window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_cd_sr_software_client_request()`` - Requests or releases a short-range Single Priority Window.
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_cd_update_short_range_activity_info()`` - Report short-range activity for Periodic Priority Window generation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_cd_update_short_range_activity_info()`` - Reports short-range activity for Periodic Priority Window generation.
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_cd_sr_power_notify()`` - short-range power-down and power-up notification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_cd_sr_power_notify()`` - Notifies the coexistence driver of short-range power-down and power-up events.
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()`` - Wi-Fi power-down and power-up notification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_cd_wifi_power_notify()`` - Notifies the coexistence driver of Wi-Fi power-down and power-up events.
```

Author: Applied.

> APIs exposed by the short-range driver and invoked by the coexistence driver:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following APIs are exposed by the short-range driver and invoked by the coexistence driver:
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_sr_enable()`` - Enable or disable short-range coexistence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_sr_enable()`` - Enables or disables short-range coexistence.
```

Author: Applied.

> * ``coex_sr_set_client_priority()`` - Configure the short-range client priority ranges.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``coex_sr_set_client_priority()`` - Configures the short-range client priority ranges.
```

Author: Applied.
